Mary kept listening to what Jesus was saying.
How commendable!
She set the right priorities
and is a good example for us.
Martha, her sister, however,
received loving correction from Jesus,
as our printed comment puts it.
Now let us, today, put ourselves
in the shoes of Martha for a moment.
She showed great interest in supporting Jesus
by providing him a base during his ministry
in the difficult area of Judea.
Now this time,
Mary and Martha
were probably working together
to prepare things for Jesus.
But after Jesus arrived,
Mary stopped helping as our text indicates.
How did Martha feel about it?
Now she had to care for everything herself.
Can we imagine the tension rising
within Martha’s heart?
The stress level is increased,
and her dear sister
sits and listens to Jesus.
So she asked Jesus to correct Mary,
to order her back to work.
But to her surprise, she, Martha,
received counsel from Jesus.
How would we feel in such a situation?
We are doing something well-intentioned
and, yet, instead of commendation,
we receive counsel.
Maybe our eyes filled with tears.
We feel the pain in our chest.
We might think we can’t breathe anymore.
Did Martha think for a moment,
replying to Jesus, saying:
“This is not fair!
“I am doing everything to support you,
and now this.
“You know, from now on,
I am listening too,
and I am curious to find out
who prepares the meals for you.”
Of course, we don’t know
what Martha thought and said.
But what we do know,
as our printed comment puts it,
she took to heart Jesus’ loving correction.
What can help us
to overcome such a painful moment
and to progress?
The term often used in this connection
is “resilience.”
People who are resilient
are able to recover easily and quickly
from unpleasant and damaging events.
It is like the ability of this piece of metal
to tolerate pressure
and go back to its original form.
Let us, therefore,
look at three factors that make us resilient
and different from those
who easily give up and surrender.
Now, the first factor is facing reality
—facing reality.
Let us, please,
open to Proverbs chapter 28.
The question we are asking ourselves
in a difficult moment is this:
‘Do I truly understand and accept
the reality of my situation?’
Here, at Proverbs 28:26,
it starts by saying:
“Whoever trusts in his own heart
is stupid.”
We might tend to put on emotional blinders
and see only what we want to see.
Many people slip into denial
as a coping mechanism.
However, the Proverb continues
in the second part, saying:
“But the one who walks in wisdom
will escape.”
This means seeing things the way they are.
Facing reality
—really facing reality is grueling work.
Indeed, it can be unpleasant
and often emotionally wrenching.
The apostle Peter had this experience
when Jesus looked at him
after Peter had denied him three times.
Peter faced reality, went outside,
broke down, and wept bitterly.
For sure, he was not looking for any excuses.
This experience, as well as other situations
where he received counsel,
helped him to make progress
and to fulfill his assignments even better.
Now, what is the second factor?
We call it “meaning-making.”
We might know people who
under pressure threw up their hands
and cried and said,
“Why is this happening to me?”
Such people see themselves as victims,
and living through hardship
does not teach them any lessons.
We, however,
based on our Bible knowledge,
understand why difficulties
and challenging situations
are sometimes unavoidable.
Seeing the bigger picture adds meaning.
This helps us, as a resilient person,
not only to endure
an unpleasant situation or a new circumstance
but also to look at seeming obstacles
and see an opportunity in it.
We all know that no one is perfect.
Everyone fails at something sometime.
So our choice
is the manner in which we respond.
We are actively trying
to make the best out of it,
looking ahead rather than behind,
setting goals
—maybe new goals.
We might remember how Brother Harold King
showed this resilient disposition
when he was in solitary confinement.
How did he give meaning
to his difficult situation
by making the best out of it?
He said:
“I arranged
for a program of ‘preaching’ activity.
“But to whom does one preach
when in solitary confinement?
“I decided that I would build up
some appropriate Bible sermons
“from the things I could remember
and then preach to imaginary characters.”
So in our context, we can say
meaning-making is like building a bridge
from present day hardships
to a better future.
By means of this bridge,
we make a difficult situation manageable.
We remove the sense
that the present is overwhelming.
Now let’s look at the third factor:
a balanced view of ourselves.
Well, we said at the beginning
that we have to face reality
which can go along with feelings
of sadness and disappointment.
As resilient people,
we don’t take a failure
or a challenging situation personally.
Let us, please, open to Romans chapter 7,
because we want to demonstrate this point
by means of the example of the apostle Paul.
At times,
he felt discouraged over his weaknesses.
Here in chapter 7,
he describes the pain of conscience
that he suffered
because of feeling captive to sin.
But then in verse 24,
he cries out, saying:
“Miserable man that I am!”
Evidently, though, Paul realized
that his imperfection did not define him.
Nine years later,
in his second letter to his friend Timothy,
shortly before his death,
he stated
his personal conclusion of the matter
here at 2 Timothy 4:7.
He said:
“I have fought the fine fight,
“I have run the race to the finish,
I have observed the faith.”
Paul’s problems and inner struggle
did not miraculously disappear.
Still, it did not prevent him
from accomplishing
remarkable things in Jehovah’s service.
So, therefore, we do not berate ourselves
with self-defeating language,
such as “I’m a failure”
or “I’m useless.”
Reflecting on positive aspects of our lives
and reflecting on our strengths
helps us to maintain
a balanced view of ourselves.
So in conclusion,
the experience of Martha reminded us today
of the importance of building
and maintaining resilience
by facing reality,
meaning-making,
and maintaining a balanced view of ourselves.